## Configuring SBT

In this section we'll look at the standard directory structure of a Play project and the locations and contents of the main configuration files. We'll also look at how Play, which is shipped as a plugin to SBT, interacts with and modifies the default commands to make web development easier.

The exercises in this book use three configuration files, which is sufficient to configure most SBT projects. We'll look at each file in turn in the following sections and discuss the main components.

### Directory Structure

Play projects have the following directory structure:

----------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------
Directory / Filename          Contents
----------------------------- ----------------------------------------------------------------------------
`/build.sbt`                  Main build configuration file

`/project`                    Directory containing extra SBT/build configuration files

`/project/build.properties`   Configures which version of SBT to load (optional)

`/project/plugins.sbt`        Configures which SBT plugins to load

`/app`                        Directory containing application code (equivalent of `src/main/scala`)

`/test`                       Directory containing unit tests (equivalent of `src/test/scala`)

`/conf`                       Application configuration files (used by Play at runtime)

`/conf/application.conf`      Main application configuration

`/conf/logger.xml`            Logging configuration

`/logs`                       Logs generated by the web server during development

`/public`                     Static files: HTML, CSS, Javascript, and so on

`/target`                     Files generated by the build process (including class files and staged JARs)

----------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------

### The *build.properties* File

`project/build.properties` is an optional file used to specify the version of SBT to use. If we omit this file the launcher will load a default version of SBT (normally the one we downloaded when we installed SBT). The contents of this file is simply:

~~~
sbt.version=0.13.5
~~~

### Configuration Files

`build.sbt` contains the main project configuration. We'll discuss this file in more detail below. It is written in a Scala-like DSL that we will discuss below. We use this file to define the majority of our build settings, including the project name, the version of Scala we want to build against, and any libraries we want to depend on.

`project/plugins.sbt` is like `build.sbt` but is loaded earlier in the startup process. We use this to configure which plugins we want SBT to load, such as the Play plugin and `sbt-eclipse`. Plugins have the ability to augment and replace commands within SBT, which is how Play can provide commands like `stage` and `dist` that don't exist in vanilla SBT.
